The dataset we are investigating is a dataset of songs from the years 1960 - 2019. This data is taken from Spotify and we found this dataset on Kaggle. The dataset contains 19 columns with 1 column predicting popularity (0 or 1) and 18 columns for predictors. The predictors are many features of the song that relate to things such as the audio qualities or the duration of the songs. In the dataset, 1 is considered a popular song and 0 is considered a flop. A song is classified as popular if it was on the billboard 100 and it was in the US. The flops are also considered if it is from the US. This dataset has around 41 thousand rows of data and it has 50 percent 1s and 50 percent 0s.
The question we are trying to answer is what are the important features of a hit song and are we able to predict if a song will be a hit or not based on these features. Our goal is to be able to put in a song’s parameters and get a return of if it is popular or not.

We are looking at this problem from the point of view of a third party music consulting firm. For years labels have been wondering what exactly it is that makes a song a hit. Many of the companies we work for have produced countless hits but also countless misses, and never know which category the song will fall into until it is released. They want a way to be able to tell for certain whether a song will be a hit before they release it to the public, thereby taking the guesswork out of selecting which songs to release.
That’s where we come in. We want to produce a model that can predict how popular a song is going to be before anyone outside a label has heard it. This model can take in certain features of a song, such as how easy it is to dance to, the song length, whether it is explicit and much more, and compare it to songs in the past that have been similar to it. The model can then see how these similar songs have been doing in the past, before making a final prediction about the relative popularity of the song. From there, our work is done, and it is up to the label to decide whether the song will be popular enough to merit releasing it to the public.
We will be able to inform record label companies how popular and potentially profitable their songs will be. Using feature importance we can see what aspects of a song our model weighs the most in determining its
popularity. Therefore, even after companies make an informed decision on the songs they have, they will know what they should look for in the songs they produce going forward.

We have done a summary statistics of all the predictors to see if there are any outliers to be taken care of. The summary statistics are all shown in Figure 1.
We decided to drop the unimportant columns of artist name, song name, and URI - the unique resource identifier since these are redundant information.
The predictors in the model are as follows: time signature, number of sections, danceability (how suitable a track is for dancing based on elements such as tempo and regularity), energy (how intense the song is), key, loudness, mode (major is 1, minor is 0), speechiness (how many words are in the track), acousticness(is the track acoustic), duration (length of song in milliseconds), liveness (presence of an audience), valence (describes the music positiveness), tempo (beats per minute), chorus hit (when does chorus start). The data was already scaled so everything is from 0-1.
We also found out that there is no missing data. Hence, there is no requirement to manipulate the data. We also analyzed the distribution of various audio features like danceability, energy, and loudness to understand the characteristics of top hits. We constructed the correlation between popularity and different audio features to identify which features are strongly associated with higher popularity. We plotted the correlation matrix to better represent the correlations if it exists.
